Quarkus Observability Roadmap 2023 Blog post (#1557)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2022-10-19-quarkus-observability-roadmap-2023.adoc

via OpenTelemetry Tracing.

== Metrics and Micrometer

On the Metrics front, it became evident that while https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics]
and https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics] were acceptable for simple
use cases, they had some issues with more advanced ones. It also didn't help that users from different technologies had
to learn new APIs and constructs to extract metrics information from their applications. We made a move to adopt
https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] to resolve some of these issues while at the same time offering a less intrusive
way to monitor Quarkus applications.

We know that a new version of https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics] is in the works,
and an implementation provided by https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics] will be available.
Unfortunately, at this time, we feel that the current
https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics] path does not address many of our concerns.

We intend to keep the https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] approach and expand it to the remaining areas. With

> OpenTelemetry Metrics reaching a stable milestone and Micrometer compromise to support

Reviewer: There is no compromise here.. it was always the intent (from the beginning). Language suggests this was a concession of some kind...

Author: It was in the context of Micrometer taking the step also to support OpenTelemetry (they could have decided not to support it).

Do you have a different suggestion?

---
layout: post
title: 'Quarkus Observability Roadmap 2023'
date: 2022-10-19
tags: observability tracing metrics opentelemetry smallrye microprofile
synopsis: 'Quarkus Observability Roadmap 2023.'
author: radcortez
---

https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] had come a long way in the Observability space. Initial support for Tracing and Metrics
came from MicroProfile and their respective implementations,
https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-opentracing/[SmallRye OpenTracing] and

> https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics]. These expanded beyond the original specifications, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics]. Because the observability space evolved, these implementations expanded beyond the original specifications, and
```

support for Tracing and Metrics reached some of the most popular https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] extensions.

> Our goal with https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] is always to offer the best technologies to get the job done. It was true for

Author: I can remove the links, but I think it doesn't hurt :)

> Our goal with https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] is always to offer the best technologies to get the job done. It was true for

Reviewer 3: yeah, I think there are too many links in the post

both https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-opentracing/[SmallRye OpenTracing] and
https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics], but we now believe there are better alternatives to
pursue in the upcoming https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] versions.

== OpenTracing Archived

> At the beginning of 2022, the https://https://www.cncf.io[CNCF] announced that it was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the beginning of 2022, the https://https://www.cncf.io[CNCF] announced that there were
```

https://www.cncf.io/blog/2022/01/31/cncf-archives-the-opentracing-project/[archiving the OpenTracing project], meaning
that the project is no longer maintained. An expected decision since the merger between

> https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] and http://opencensus.io/[OpenCensus] to form

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] and http://opencensus.io/[OpenCensus] to kick off the
```

> http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry project].
```

> https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] released the first version of the OpenTelemetry Extension with Quarkus 1.13.0.Final, in Q1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] released the first version of the OpenTelemetry Extension with Quarkus 1.13.0.Final.
```

> of 2021. The initial support was only for HTTP Tracing but slowly moved to other components, including CDI, gRPC,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The initial support was only for HTTP Tracing but expanded to cover other components, including CDI, gRPC,
```

> Reactive, Messaging, and many more, while also adopting and adjusting to all the new APIs released by OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 4: Is it `Reactive, Messaging` or `Reactive Messaging`? Just checking.

Author: It is `Reactive, Messaging`, because it is not only Reactive Messaging, but also REST Reactive, but I thought it would be more confusing. We could name everything to make it explicit.

Tracing. Our goal is to continue this work, expand OpenTelemetry Tracing to the remaining components and close the
integration gaps between https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] and Tracing.

*Moving forward, https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-opentracing/[SmallRye OpenTracing] and all of the
https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] work in https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] are now deprecated!*

While things will likely continue to work, we encourage all our
users to move to http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry], for all the Tracing capabilities. In the following upcoming

> versions, we may start to remove https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] support from some extensions and continue that work until

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
versions, we may start removing https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] support from some extensions and continue that work until
```

> versions, we may start to remove https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] from some extensions and continue that work until

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
versions, we may start to remove https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] support from some extensions and continue that work until
```

we completely remove https://opentracing.io[OpenTracing] from https://quarkus.io[Quarkus].

For http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] users out there that rely on
https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-opentracing[MicroProfile OpenTracing], MicroProfile 6.0, which will be

> supported by Quarkus 3 (and the Jakarta rename), ships

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
supported by Quarkus 3.x, ships
```

https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry[MicroProfile Telemetry Tracing]. This new specification defines the
behaviors that allow http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] applications to participate in an environment where
distributed tracing is enabled via OpenTelemetry Tracing.

== Metrics and Micrometer

On the Metrics front, it became evident that while https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics]
and https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics] were acceptable for simple
use cases, they had some issues with more advanced ones. It also didn't help that users from different technologies had
to learn new APIs and constructs to extract metrics information from their applications. We made a move to adopt
https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] to resolve some of these issues while at the same time offering a less intrusive
ways to monitor https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] applications.

We intend to keep the https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] approach and expand it to the remaining areas. With

> OpenTelemetry Metrics reaching a stable milestone and https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] compromise to support

Reviewer 3: It is not clear enough what we'll do.
Use Micrometer through OTel?
Use Micrometer and OTel Metrics?
Just Use Otel Metrics?

Author: I believe we still have to figure out that correctly, so I think it is acceptable to leave it open. If you and @ebullient already know how to proceed, feel free to propose a different statement.

Reviewer 3: I'd prefer to use Micrometer through OTel and also provide OTel metrics support. However, we need to chat on creating an abstraction that simplifies implementing this approach.

Author: Do you think it is relevant to include that detail here? Or can you leave it open?

Reviewer 3: This is important and should be discussed.

Reviewer 3: Discussed on a meeting and agreed

http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry], we expect to tie together both tracing and metrics
in the Observability capabilities of https://quarkus.io[Quarkus].

> We know that a new version of https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics] is in the works,

Reviewer 2: I will move that before mentioning micrometer.

and an implementation provided by https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics] will be available.
Unfortunately, at this time, we feel that the current
https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics] path does not address many of our concerns.

> https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] supports http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] adopting industry initiatives that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] provides http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] implementation when the proposed specification sufficiently addresses the problem space. 
```

> sufficiently address http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] needs. If needs are not sufficiently addressed and an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If needs are not sufficiently addressed and an
```

industry initiative is open to collaboration, https://quarkus.io[Quarkus] proposes working within those

> initiatives to address http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] needs and not having http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
initiatives to address http://microprofile.io[MicroProfile] needs and not having MicroProfile
```

> appear to compete with them by creating its specification. From our understanding, the current proposal is for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
appear to compete with them by creating another specification. From our understanding, the current proposal is for
```

approach is to follow http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry] Metrics and https://micrometer.io[Micrometer] initiatives,
which are already well established and are trying to cover a comprehensive set of system components, including cloud
providers, applications, and tooling.

*We don’t intend to support the new https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-metrics[MicroProfile Metrics] specification,
and the current SmallRye Metrics Quarkus extension will be deprecated.*

The https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-metrics/[SmallRye Metrics] component will still be
under active development by IBM and Tomitribe. We will keep monitoring the situation and may revise our decision based
on users feedback.

== Future

There is still a lot of work to be done in Tracing and Metrics, but we also want to start looking into Logging, which
is part of the http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry] specification. Our primary focus for 2023 will be to clean up
and provide the missing capabilities on the existing extensions and give some of the new things coming from
http://opentelemetry.io[OpenTelemetry]. As always, we are looking forward to your feedback and contributions. Feel

> free to look at our https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/projects/20[Observability] roadmap and help us move

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
free to look at our https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/projects/20[Observability roadmap] and help us move
```
